# Beneath Apple Manor

Beneath Apple Manor was a dungeon crawler released in 1978 for the Apple II. Despite being relatively unknown and rarely mentioned, the game boasts unique mechanics, concepts, and features that would in time become staples of the gaming industry, and are in fact genre defining. It’s main claim to fame is it’s procedural generation, the first known video game to make use of this technology, and takes full advantage of this feature. It is also likely one of the first games to be inspired/based on tabletop roleplaying games such as dungeons and dragons.

Beneath Apple Manor relies heavily on its mechanics to inspire the player. The player is told little outright and left to explore and figure out what to do, the main goal in the early stages being mainly to get stronger and gain a better understanding of how the game works. The core of the game is progressing through randomised levels, finding treasure, and fighting monsters; all with some focus on roleplaying. While today such games are called rogue-likes, Beneath Apple Manor proceeded the genre’s namesake “Rogue” by two years.

&#x20;The players stats are improved even through failure, which is necessary given some enemies are impossible to defeat early in the game. This encourages the player to keep playing even through failure, which was necessary for a game that in earlier versions didn’t have a save feature. It requires the player to be patient and relentless for a chance of victory, and encourages persistence.

The inspiration taken from table top games is clear. Despite how simple the game seems on the surface, the game actively encourages players to take on the role of the character through various mechanics. Having the procedurally generated map be revealed through exploration is a good example of this. Another good example is the player’s class. Instead of choosing a class at the beginning, it is set to a default of warrior and changed through the player choices throughout the game, for example shifting to wizard if the player primarily uses the zap attack, making the game more complex than it might look to be at a glance.

Death is quick and sometimes not expected. Instead of being a game over however, it is more of a minor setback. Interacting with a chest has a small chance of killing the player without warning, leading to a sense of danger once the player learns from their mistakes. However, learning is slowed down by the game’s simplicity. The lack of animations or descriptions makes death quick and brutal but can leave the player confused as to what the cause was. Since death matters little, winning is only a matter of time instead of necessarily a matter of skill.

The game gives players many options for graphics depending on the monitor in use, giving an interesting snapshot into the range of technology available at the time. The various choices break down to colour or black and white, or ascii graphics. Interestingly, the ascii graphics are the only option with any sort of animations, though only in the form of flashing characters.

The colour palette is limited but vibrant in the RGB graphics option, important pieces on the screen stand out against the black and white background. Purple and blue are used for the most important features on the screen, such as the player, doors, and chests. This is interesting given in later games purple is usually used to express poison effects or danger to the player. Beneath Apple Manor shows that this wasn’t always standard.

The story is limited only to the user manual and seems to only exist to inspire the player to roleplay through gameplay. For example it is outright stated that the exploration mechanic is meant to simulate torchlight, and that the shifting character class is to encourage the player to invest in their character. Exploration and adventure are the driving factors to push the player to keep playing.

&#x20;Since the story only exists to encourage the player to continue, there are a few oddities. In later versions of the game a save feature was introduced and explained as the characters brainwaves being scanned and then cloned, leaving a random snippet of science fiction in an otherwise fantasy setting. This is a good example of how patched together the game can feel in places, often from being improved and rereleased. The game and its accompanying manual doesn’t take itself seriously, clashing more serious roleplaying with a more light hearted tone.

In conclusion, while Beneath Apple Manor was the first of it’s kind, it mainly seems to be forgotten and overshadowed by games that came after it that use similar mechanics. While it didn’t have a huge impact, it could be argued that it laid the groundwork for a lot of features of modern games, and has features that have rarely if ever been seen since. Beneath Apple Manor serves as a snapshot of the time it was built in, as well as a glimpse of what was ahead.
