# Shadowgate

Being released in 1987, Shadowgate is a great example of what a point-and-click game is. Combining text descriptions with detailed scenery, the player is tasked with navigating this fantasy world and the logic behind it. This combination of text along with an interactive environment proved to be extremely popular, quickly being adapted to various forms of personal computers and consoles. While the execution shifted with each new release, the core mechanic of matching words to objects remains the same. This simple idea creates complicated challenges, encouraging the player to experiment to get a better understanding of the logic of the world

To make any progress in Shadowgate, the player has to fail multiple times to get an understanding of what the game is asking them to do, and what order actions need to be performed first. To make it through to the end, the player has to follow a long sequence in as few turns as possible, with little room for mistakes. The only way to figure out the correct actions is through experimentation and failure, as well as learning how the fictional world operates and the logic behind it. Since Shadowgate is a fictional world, sequential reasoning is no longer intuitive and has to be relearned, for example, how many items the player can take before the dragon burns them, but still follows a logical pattern. This is the challenge the game gives the player, understanding how the fictional world operates and how to efficiently move through it. The difficulty grows as the player moves further into the fictional space. The rooms become more detailed and complex as the player moves through the castle and gains a better understanding of how to navigate the world and its puzzles.

On the surface, the options presented to the player look limited. The player interacts with the world with only five verbs: Examine, Open, Close, Speak, Operate, Go, Hit, and Consume. The Player can try any verb with any interactable object on the screen without the game stopping them, which helps the world feel more organic. This adds to the challenge, since the player could waste their time and risk burning through a limited amount of torches, but also sets the logic of the world. Merging sequences the player would already understand, such as the sequence “open” to door, then “go” to door, to logic unique to the world such as “speak” to a rope on the floor to get it to move. This helps players not only gain a better understanding of what they should do early on in the game but helps set how sequential reasoning functions in this setting. There is also a limited inventory space, forcing the player to consider where and when each item is needed.

Sequential reasoning is not limited to the problems given to the player. In the castle shadowgate, there are dozens of rooms, many of which take going back to previous rooms to get to. Since there are also a limited amount of torches, and the player risking death if forced to move in the dark, a new layer of gameplay has to be considered. To successfully reach the end, the player has to consider the problem in front of them, how it relates to every other problem, and how many torches are available. Prioritizing is a must and further complicates the sequential reasoning needed to win the game.

Death is constant and quick. Since the only way to make progress is to try and fail constantly, it is necessary for the game to ensure failure isn’t frustrating or discouraging. Shadowgate does this well. There is no interference when starting a new game after death, and the player is brought back to the first scene quickly after only having to press one button. In fact, death often means the player will progress faster if they try again, now knowing how to efficiently move through another section of the game. While failing over and over again risks frustrating the player, the concept of needing to fail to succeed is built into the core of how Shadowgate functions.

The setting of Shadowgate is particularly important for supporting the mechanic of sequential reasoning. While the player might not know how this particular world's logic works, some preconceived notions on fantasy castles provide a good starting point for the player. A player would never start out completely clueless, informed by experience one might have with similar settings. Hidden passages, magic, and dangerous monsters are all examples of ideas that apply to Shadowgate as well as to general fantasy tropes. One instance of this is how the player has to defeat a wraith. A magic torch must be used on the wraith to safely get past it. Without the player having the general idea that magical items defeat magical monsters, this problem could only be solved by experimenting with each combination.

The appearance of the game screen, also known as graphics, also plays an important role. While the pixel art is a product of the technology available at the time of development, it also creates the impression of a cluttered space. Hidden doors and important objects are made harder to spot amongst the detailing of stone walls. This is made even more difficult with the original monochrome colour palette, though this does change in later versions of the game.

In conclusion, Shadowgate presents the player with sequential reasoning challenges in the form of linking verbs to an interactive environment. It teaches players the logic of the world by gradually and organically increasing difficulty and through forcing the player to experiment and fail. The flow of gameplay is key to its success, never hindering the player from navigating the world easily and not punishing the player for failing too severely. All of these factors combine to create an engaging and fluid experience and a great example of what the point-and-click genre is capable of.
